pqdevnet0: client specs (#8)
leanEthereum/leanSpec: docs/client/networking.md

# Networking

## Setup

- Transport: QUIC on IPv4

> - Encryption and identification: [Libp2p-noise](https://github.com/libp2p/specs/tree/master/noise) with `secp256k1` identities

Author: We just discussed about this in ream call and looks doable to us. But before I update accordingly can I also flag @kamilsa for opinion since qdvrm is also planning to participate as a client?

> - Encryption and identification: [Libp2p-noise](https://github.com/libp2p/specs/tree/master/noise) with `secp256k1` identities

Author: Updated in 65daac2

- Protocol negotiation: [multistream-select 1.0](https://github.com/multiformats/multistream-select/)
- Multiplexing: Native support by QUIC

> - Gossip: [gossipsub v1](https://github.com/libp2p/specs/blob/master/pubsub/gossipsub/gossipsub-v1.0.md)

Reviewer: yes peer scoring is a mute point as this is a trusted setup

## Node identification

> Nodes are defined as a list of their ENRs in a yaml file at [`src/lean_spec/client/nodes.yaml`](../../src/lean_spec/client/nodes.yaml).

Author: Is there something you'd like to test in pqdevnet0? Because if the info is not used immediately in pqdevnet0, I'd prefer to defer adopting it until it's needed actually. And introducing it later shouldn't be too troublesome since we all are expecting the specs to be changing a lot anyway.

- enr:-Ku4QPn5eVhcoF1opaFEvg1b6JNFD2rqVkHQ8HApOKK61OIcIXD127bKWgAtbwI7pnxx6cDyk_nI88TrZKQaGMZj0q0Bh2F0dG5ldHOIAAAAAAAAAACEZXRoMpC1MD8qAAAAAP__________gmlkgnY0gmlwhDayLMaJc2VjcDI1NmsxoQK2sBOLGcUb4AwuYzFuAVCaNHA-dy24UuEKkeFNgCVCsIN1ZHCCIyg
- enr:-Ku4QG-2_Md3sZIAUebGYT6g0SMskIml77l6yR-M_JXc-UdNHCmHQeOiMLbylPejyJsdAPsTHJyjJB2sYGDLe0dn8uYBh2F0dG5ldHOIAAAAAAAAAACEZXRoMpC1MD8qAAAAAP__________gmlkgnY0gmlwhBLY-NyJc2VjcDI1NmsxoQORcM6e19T1T9gi7jxEZjk_sjVLGFscUNqAY9obgZaxbIN1ZHCCIyg
```

## Gossip domain

**Protocol ID:** `/meshsub/1.1.0`

**Gossipsub Parameters**

The following gossipsub
[parameters](https://github.com/libp2p/specs/blob/master/pubsub/gossipsub/gossipsub-v1.0.md#parameters)
will be used:

- `D` (topic stable mesh target count): 8
- `D_low` (topic stable mesh low watermark): 6
- `D_high` (topic stable mesh high watermark): 12
- `D_lazy` (gossip target): 6
- `heartbeat_interval` (frequency of heartbeat, seconds): 0.7
- `fanout_ttl` (ttl for fanout maps for topics we are not subscribed to but have
  published to, seconds): 60
- `mcache_len` (number of windows to retain full messages in cache for `IWANT`
  responses): 6
- `mcache_gossip` (number of windows to gossip about): 3

> - `seen_ttl` (expiry time for cache of seen message ids, seconds):
>   SECONDS_PER_SLOT * SLOTS_PER_EPOCH * 2

Author: Assuming an epoch now becomes just 3 slots. So maybe this?

```suggestion
- `seen_ttl` (expiry time for cache of seen message ids, seconds):
  SECONDS_PER_SLOT * 3 * 2
```

>   SECONDS_PER_SLOT * SLOTS_PER_EPOCH * 2

Reviewer 2: Wouldn't an epoch be 1 slot?

>   SECONDS_PER_SLOT * SLOTS_PER_EPOCH * 2

Author: > Wouldn't an epoch be 1 slot?

I picked 3 slots from the max lookback that's relevant to 3SF's justification & finalization. Then `* 2` for ["This value should be chosen to approximate the propagation delay in the overlay, within a healthy margin."](https://github.com/libp2p/specs/blob/master/pubsub/gossipsub/gossipsub-v1.0.md#message-cache) but not too sure

cc: @kamilsa thoughts?

>   SECONDS_PER_SLOT * SLOTS_PER_EPOCH * 2

Reviewer: @GrapeBaBa @spiral-ladder

Clients MUST reject (fail validation) messages containing an incorrect type, or
invalid payload.

#### Encodings

Topics are post-fixed with an encoding. Encodings define how the payload of a
gossipsub message is encoded.

- `ssz_snappy` - All objects are SSZ-encoded and then compressed with
  [Snappy](https://github.com/google/snappy) block compression. Example: The
  lean block topic string is `/leanconsensus/devnet0/lean_block/ssz_snappy`,
  and the data field of a gossipsub message is an `Block` that has been
  SSZ-encoded and then compressed with Snappy.

### The Req/Resp domain

#### Encoding strategies

The token of the negotiated protocol ID specifies the type of encoding to be
used for the req/resp interaction. Only one value is possible at this time:

- `ssz_snappy`: The contents are first
  [SSZ-encoded](../../ssz/simple-serialize.md) and then compressed with
  [Snappy](https://github.com/google/snappy) frames compression. For objects
  containing a single field, only the field is SSZ-encoded not a container with
  a single field. For example, the `LeanBlocksByRoot` request is an
  SSZ-encoded list of `Root`'s.

#### Messages

##### LeanBlocksByRoot v1

> **Protocol ID:** `/leanconsensus/req/lean_blocks_by_root/1/`

Author: Added a new Status message as suggested: https://github.com/leanEthereum/leanSpec/pull/8/commits/e38593e58ef9adbcaf103b931558d874fe3e98e1

cc: @g11tech

# Networking

## Setup

- Transport: QUIC on IPv4

> - Encryption and identification: [Libp2p-noise](https://github.com/libp2p/specs/tree/master/noise) with `secp256k1` identities

Author: Carried over @kamilsa's comment from previous PR:

> QUIC already integrates TLS, so maybe we don't have to bother with Noise?

- Multiplexing: Native support by QUIC
- Gossip: [gossipsub v1](https://github.com/libp2p/specs/blob/master/pubsub/gossipsub/gossipsub-v1.0.md)

## Gossip domain

**Protocol ID:** `/meshsub/1.1.0`

**Gossipsub Parameters**

The following gossipsub
[parameters](https://github.com/libp2p/specs/blob/master/pubsub/gossipsub/gossipsub-v1.0.md#parameters)
will be used:

- `D` (topic stable mesh target count): 8
- `D_low` (topic stable mesh low watermark): 6
- `D_high` (topic stable mesh high watermark): 12
- `D_lazy` (gossip target): 6
- `heartbeat_interval` (frequency of heartbeat, seconds): 0.7
- `fanout_ttl` (ttl for fanout maps for topics we are not subscribed to but have
  published to, seconds): 60
- `mcache_len` (number of windows to retain full messages in cache for `IWANT`
  responses): 6
- `mcache_gossip` (number of windows to gossip about): 3
- `seen_ttl` (expiry time for cache of seen message ids, seconds):
  SECONDS_PER_SLOT * SLOTS_PER_EPOCH * 2

#### Topics and messages

Topics are plain UTF-8 strings and are encoded on the wire as determined by
protobuf (gossipsub messages are enveloped in protobuf messages). Topic strings

> have form: `/leanconsensus/devnet0/Name/Encoding`. This defines both the type of

Reviewer: we should probably retain ForkDigestValue here

> have form: `/leanconsensus/devnet0/Name/Encoding`. This defines both the type of

Author: Similar convo here: https://github.com/leanEthereum/leanSpec/pull/8#discussion_r2284614507 so what's concluded there will be updated here.

## Node identification

Nodes are defined as a list of their ENRs in a yaml file at [`src/lean_spec/client/nodes.yaml`](../../src/lean_spec/client/nodes.yaml).
For example:

```yaml
- enr:-Ku4QHqVeJ8PPICcWk1vSn_XcSkjOkNiTg6Fmii5j6vUQgvzMc9L1goFnLKgXqBJspJjIsB91LTOleFmyWWrFVATGngBh2F0dG5ldHOIAAAAAAAAAACEZXRoMpC1MD8qAAAAAP__________gmlkgnY0gmlwhAMRHkWJc2VjcDI1NmsxoQKLVXFOhp2uX6jeT0DvvDpPcU8FWMjQdR4wMuORMhpX24N1ZHCCIyg
- enr:-Ku4QPn5eVhcoF1opaFEvg1b6JNFD2rqVkHQ8HApOKK61OIcIXD127bKWgAtbwI7pnxx6cDyk_nI88TrZKQaGMZj0q0Bh2F0dG5ldHOIAAAAAAAAAACEZXRoMpC1MD8qAAAAAP__________gmlkgnY0gmlwhDayLMaJc2VjcDI1NmsxoQK2sBOLGcUb4AwuYzFuAVCaNHA-dy24UuEKkeFNgCVCsIN1ZHCCIyg
- enr:-Ku4QG-2_Md3sZIAUebGYT6g0SMskIml77l6yR-M_JXc-UdNHCmHQeOiMLbylPejyJsdAPsTHJyjJB2sYGDLe0dn8uYBh2F0dG5ldHOIAAAAAAAAAACEZXRoMpC1MD8qAAAAAP__________gmlkgnY0gmlwhBLY-NyJc2VjcDI1NmsxoQORcM6e19T1T9gi7jxEZjk_sjVLGFscUNqAY9obgZaxbIN1ZHCCIyg
```

## Gossip domain

**Protocol ID:** `/meshsub/1.0.0`

**Gossipsub Parameters**

The following gossipsub
[parameters](https://github.com/libp2p/specs/blob/master/pubsub/gossipsub/gossipsub-v1.0.md#parameters)
will be used:

> - `D` (topic stable mesh target count): 8

Reviewer: @GrapeBaBa @spiral-ladder
pls review there params and add comments of any

Reviewer 3: Default params should be OK.

- `D_low` (topic stable mesh low watermark): 6
- `D_high` (topic stable mesh high watermark): 12
- `D_lazy` (gossip target): 6
- `heartbeat_interval` (frequency of heartbeat, seconds): 0.7
- `fanout_ttl` (ttl for fanout maps for topics we are not subscribed to but have
  published to, seconds): 60
- `mcache_len` (number of windows to retain full messages in cache for `IWANT`
  responses): 6
- `mcache_gossip` (number of windows to gossip about): 3
- `seen_ttl` (expiry time for cache of seen message ids, seconds):
  SECONDS_PER_SLOT * SLOTS_PER_EPOCH * 2

#### Topics and messages

Topics are plain UTF-8 strings and are encoded on the wire as determined by
protobuf (gossipsub messages are enveloped in protobuf messages). Topic strings

> have form: `/leanconsensus/devnet0/Name/Encoding`. This defines both the type of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
have form: `/ethconsensus/lean/Name/Encoding`. This defines both the type of
```
or how about this?

Author: `lean_consensus/devnet0/Name/Encoding` makes sense. But will wait to hear from @g11tech

Reviewer 2: we will be having multiple devnets and testnets, so I think we should have a fork field. We shouldn't have lean be the fork for all of our devnet's and testnet's

Reviewer 2: devnet0 hence should be the fork digest

Reviewer 2: if lean was a fork of the beacon chain we would use ``eth2/fork_digest/Name/Encoding`` etc

data being sent on the topic and how the data field of the message is encoded.

- `Name` - see table below
- `Encoding` - the encoding strategy describes a specific representation of
  bytes that will be transmitted over the wire. See the [Encodings](#Encodings)
  section for further details.

The optional `from` (1), `seqno` (3), `signature` (5) and `key` (6) protobuf
fields are omitted from the message, since messages are identified by content,
anonymous, and signed where necessary in the application layer.

The `message-id` of a gossipsub message MUST be the following 20 byte value
computed from the message data:

- If `message.data` has a valid snappy decompression, set `message-id` to the
  first 20 bytes of the `SHA256` hash of the concatenation of

>   `MESSAGE_DOMAIN_VALID_SNAPPY` with the snappy decompressed message data, i.e.

Reviewer: need to have MESSAGE_DOMAIN_VALID_SNAPPY and MESSAGE_DOMAIN_INVALID_SNAPPY values copied over or we can assume any unmentioned references go to beacon specs

# Networking

## Setup

- Transport: QUIC on IPv4, secured by TLS 1.3 with `ED25519` identities
- Protocol negotiation: [multistream-select 1.0](https://github.com/multiformats/multistream-select/)
- Multiplexing: Native support by QUIC
- Gossip: [gossipsub v1](https://github.com/libp2p/specs/blob/master/pubsub/gossipsub/gossipsub-v1.0.md)

> ## Node identification

Reviewer 4: It would make sense to specify exactly how the ENR will look since it will deviate from the standard form defined in the [EIP-778](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-778).

Author: Added https://github.com/leanEthereum/leanSpec/pull/8/commits/cdcf9ae71d7fea87ecabfe4e03dcf802966cc43a

But I'm not sure how feasible it is to replace the `secp256k1` field with `ed25519` in the ENR implementation, @g11tech @varun-doshi can you have a check? cc: @syjn99 @Kayden-ML

Reviewer 2: All Enr implementations already support this though right. Sigp/enr does why wouldn't the others etc

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/sigp/enr/blob/master/src/lib.rs#L34

Read the comment

Reviewer 3: Yes, ed25519 is more simple for us since the Zig std not support bitcoin secp256k1 right now.

Reviewer 3: @unnawut @KolbyML @g11tech @Vid201 I just read [EIP-778](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-778), it only defines secp256k1 algo and currently only rust ENR implementation extends with ed25519, others such as JS, Go don't have that. And after read [zig-discv5](https://github.com/ChainSafe/zig-discv5) code, its design only support secp256k1 too. So it may be better to stick to secp256k1, I can use this [wrapper](https://github.com/Syndica/secp256k1-zig) to replace Zig std secp256k1 in the [zig-discv5](https://github.com/ChainSafe/zig-discv5).

Reviewer: i guess we can go with ed25519 and we can extend 778 EIP into a new one since we are not dealing with beacon clients anyway

computed from the message data:

- If `message.data` has a valid snappy decompression, set `message-id` to the
  first 20 bytes of the `SHA256` hash of the concatenation of
  `MESSAGE_DOMAIN_VALID_SNAPPY` with the snappy decompressed message data, i.e.
  `SHA256(MESSAGE_DOMAIN_VALID_SNAPPY + snappy_decompress(message.data))[:20]`.
- Otherwise, set `message-id` to the first 20 bytes of the `SHA256` hash of the
  concatenation of `MESSAGE_DOMAIN_INVALID_SNAPPY` with the raw message data,
  i.e. `SHA256(MESSAGE_DOMAIN_INVALID_SNAPPY + message.data)[:20]`.

Where relevant, clients MUST reject messages with `message-id` sizes other than
20 bytes.

*Note*: The above logic handles two exceptional cases: (1) multiple snappy
`data` can decompress to the same value, and (2) some message `data` can fail to
snappy decompress altogether.

The payload is carried in the `data` field of a gossipsub message, and varies
depending on the topic:

| Name                             | Message Type              |
| -------------------------------- | ------------------------- |
| `block`                     | `SignedBlock`                   |

> | `lean_vote`               | `SignedVote`             |

Author: @g11tech Wdyt?

> | `lean_vote`               | `SignedVote`             |

Reviewer 2: then we should remove the `lean_` in `lean_vote`
